---
title: "Intro post: Why care about intuition?"
layout: post
---

I consider that I understand an equation when I can predict the properties of its solutions without solving it.
-Paul Dirac{%sidenote 'One' 'F. Wilczek, B. Devine, *Longing for the Harmonies*, p. 102.'%} 

...Equations without a phenomenological background remain a formal game. Only simple qualitative arguments can unveil the underlying physics.
-Phillippe Nozieres{%sidenote 'two' '[Sixty Years of Condensed Matter Physics: An Everlasting Adventure.](http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-020911-125119)'%}

My purpose on this blog is to explain the results of science and sometimes math in a way that most people can understand, and do so using experimental data and the chronological development of the subject. I believe this is the best way to teach the subject to people. I have some predecessors in this vein, but none of them have really done this in a satisfactory way. Some of them have intuitive explanations (e.g. Sanjoy Mahajan’s book{%sidenote 'three' '[*The Art of Insight in Science and Engineering.*](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/res-6-011-the-art-of-insight-in-science-and-engineering-mastering-complexity-fall-2014/pages/online-textbook/)'%}, who this blog is closest to in approach). Some of them explain the original problem a theory was invented to solve. Some of them say that the previous theory failed to explain the experimental data. But none of them (neither popular science nor technical books) do all of this and also show the actual data with the predictions (failed or not). 

Science and math are best taught as a series of improving solutions to practical and interesting problems related to explaining and predicting the world, and in this way you can show why the subject developed in the way that it did as well as showing what it really is (in addition to showing that it is fun and beautiful). My own path to this realization started in physics graduate school when I encountered the ruthless pragmatism of some of the professors and their insistence on staying close to experiments. I found this approach helped me with learning the subject and explaining it to others. I had also been reading about the history of physics and saw that this was a very common theme. So think of this blog as being for a very skeptical and yet pragmatic person, who always asks "Why is it necessary to introduce this concept? Why is it better than what came before it?" Scientists are like this too. There is also some experimental evidence that this approach works (the Benezet experiment done in the 1930s {%sidenote 'four' '[Is it time for a science counterpart of the Benezet-Berman mathematics teaching experiment of the 1930's?](https://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0512202)'%}.

Now, why should we care about intuitive understanding? By understanding in this sense, I mean “able to make an approximate numerical prediction”, not just “able to explain it in a solely verbal manner.” The first reason is that it shows you have plausibly captured the dominant effects. This is used by physicists when in the process of creating a theory to figure out if it is worthwhile to pursue. If your estimate is far off, you have not captured even the most important effects and it is not worth doing a more complicated calculation at all. In addition, if your theory does not reproduce the correct value in simple cases where you know the answer already, it is untrustworthy in more complicated cases. 

Another reason is that it provides a sanity check on our answers. If you put 124x67 into your calculator and you get an answer much different from 10,000 (more than a factor of 10 either way), something is wrong. If you do a complicated calculation (by hand or with a computer), and you don’t know the essential ingredients that go into it, it will be very hard to figure out if or where you have made errors. 

A side effect of this intuitive understanding is that it is easier to explain to people than the full calculation, because much of the time, you don’t even need more than high school math. Even so, this way of explaining does make it slightly more complicated than the average popular science book, but this complication is worth it. Lastly, it provides a way for laymen to check and verify that the result is correct instead of having to take scientists’ statements on trust.
